- [[Relational Data Bases and SQL]]
- [[PostgreSQL]]

The relational model is an approach to organizing and structuring data using tables, also referred to as “relations”.

This model organizes data into tables with rows and columns, where each row represents a single record and each column represents an attribute or field of the record.

The core concepts of the relational model include:

- **Attributes:** An attribute is a column within a table that represents a specific characteristic or property of an entity, such as “name”, “age”, “email”, etc.
- **Tuples:** A tuple is a single row within a table that represents a specific instance of an entity with its corresponding attribute values.
- **Relations:** A relation is a table that consists of a set of tuples with the same attributes. It represents the relationship between entities and their attributes.
- **Primary Key:** A primary key is a unique identifier for each tuple within a table. It enforces the uniqueness of records and is used to establish relationships between tables.
- **Foreign Key:** A foreign key is an attribute within a table that references the primary key of another table. It is used to establish and enforce connections between relations.
- **Normalization:** Normalization is a process of organizing data in a way to minimize redundancy and improve data integrity. It involves decomposing complex tables into simpler tables, ensuring unique records, and properly defining foreign keys.
- [[0. DML]]
- [[0. DML]]

## Domains in PostgreSQL

Domains in PostgreSQL are essentially user-defined data types that can be created using the `CREATE DOMAIN` command. These custom data types allow you to apply constraints and validation rules to columns in your tables by defining a set of values that are valid for a particular attribute or field. This ensures consistency and data integrity within your relational database.

To create a custom domain, you need to define a name for your domain, specify its underlying data type, and set any constraints or default values you want to apply. Domains in PostgreSQL are a great way to enforce data integrity and consistency in your relational database. They allow you to create custom data types based on existing data types with added constraints, default values, and validation rules. By using domains, you can streamline your database schema and ensure that your data complies with your business rules or requirements.

**Example**
```sql
CREATE DOMAIN us_postal_code AS TEXT
CHECK(
   VALUE ~ '^\d{5}$'
OR VALUE ~ '^\d{5}-\d{4}$'
);

CREATE TABLE us_snail_addy (
  address_id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  street1 TEXT NOT NULL,
  street2 TEXT,
  street3 TEXT,
  city TEXT NOT NULL,
  postal us_postal_code NOT NULL
);
```

## Attributes in the Relational Model

Attributes in the relational model are the columns of a table, representing the properties or characteristics of the entity described by the table.
Each attribute has a domain, defining the possible values it can take, such as integer, text, or date. Attributes play a crucial role in defining the schema of a relation (table) and are used to store and manipulate data. 

## Tuples

In the relational model, a **tuple** is a fundamental concept that represents a single record or row in a table. In PostgreSQL, a tuple is composed of a set of attribute values, each corresponding to a specific column or field in the table. A tuple is defined as an ordered set of attribute values, meaning that each value in a tuple corresponds to a specific attribute or column in the table. The values can be of different data types, such as integers, strings, or dates, depending on the schema of the table.

For example, consider a `users` table with columns `id`, `name`, and `email`. A sample tuple in this table could be `(1, 'John Smith', 'john.smith@example.com')`, where each value corresponds to its respective column.

# Relations in the Relational Model

In the relational model, a relation is essentially a table composed of rows and columns, where each row represents a unique record (or tuple) and each column represents an attribute of the data. The structure of a relation is defined by its schema, which specifies the relation’s name and the names and data types of its attributes. Relations are governed by integrity constraints, such as domain constraints, key constraints, and referential integrity constraints, to ensure data accuracy and consistency. Operations like selection, projection, join, and others can be performed on relations to retrieve and manipulate data efficiently.

**Example**
```sql
-- One to many
CREATE TABLE author (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  name TEXT
)

CREATE TABLE article (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  author_id INT NOT NULL,
  title TEXT NOT NULL,
  content TEXT NOT NULL,
  CONSTRAINT fk_author FOREIGN KEY(author_id) REFERENCES author(id)
)

-- Many to many
CREATE TABLE article (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  title TEXT
)

CREATE TABLE tag (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  tag_value TEXT
)

CREATE TABLE article_tag (
  article_id INT
  tag_id INT
  PRIMARY KEY (article_id, tag_id)
  CONSTRAINT fk_article FOREIGN KEY(article_id) REFERENCES article(id)
  CONSTRAINT fk_tag FOREIGN KEY(tag_id) REFERENCES tag(id)
)
```

### Constraints in PostgreSQL

Constraints are an essential part of the relational model, as they define rules that the data within the database must follow. They ensure that the data is consistent, accurate, and reliable.

**Primary Key** - A primary key constraint is a column or a set of columns that uniquely identifies each row in a table. There can only be one primary key per table, and its value must be unique and non-null for each row.

**Foreign Key** - A foreign key constraint ensures that a column or columns in a table refer to an existing row in another table. It helps maintain referential integrity between tables.

**Unique** - A unique constraint ensures that the values in a column or set of columns are unique across all rows in a table. In other words, it prevents duplicate entries in the specified column(s).

**Check** - A check constraint verifies that the values entered into a column meet a specific condition. It helps to maintain data integrity by restricting the values that can be inserted into a column.

**Not Null** - A NOT NULL constraint enforces that a column cannot contain a NULL value. This ensures that a value must be provided for the specified column when inserting or updating data in the table.

**Exclusion** - An exclusion constraint is a more advanced form of constraint that allows you to specify conditions that should not exist when comparing multiple rows in a table. It helps maintain data integrity by preventing conflicts in data.

## The Relational Model: Null Values

In the relational model used by PostgreSQL, null values represent missing or unknown information within a database. Unlike zero, empty strings, or other default values, null signifies the absence of a value and is treated uniquely in operations and queries. For example, any arithmetic operation involving a null results in a null, and comparisons with null using standard operators return unknown rather than true or false. To handle null values, PostgreSQL provides specific functions and constructs such as `IS NULL`, `IS NOT NULL`, and the `COALESCE` function, which returns the first non-null value in its arguments. Understanding and correctly handling null values is crucial for accurate data retrieval and integrity in relational databases.