- [[Relational Data Bases and SQL]]
- [[PostgreSQL]]

Vacuuming is an essential component in PostgreSQL maintenance tasks. By reclaiming storage, optimizing performance, and keeping the database lean, vacuuming helps maintain the health of your PostgreSQL system. During the normal operation of PostgreSQL, database tuples (rows) are updated, deleted and added. This can lead to fragmentation, wasted space, and decreased efficiency. Vacuuming is used to:

- Reclaim storage space used by dead rows.
- Update statistics for the query planner.
- Make unused space available for return to the operating system.
- Maintain the visibility map in indexed relations.

### Key Points about VACUUM:

1. **Purpose**: Reclaims space from dead tuples (rows) to free up storage and improve performance.
    
2. **Types**:
    
    - **VACUUM**: Reclaims storage but doesn’t lock the table fully, allowing concurrent access.
    - **VACUUM FULL**: Reclaims space more thoroughly by rewriting the entire table but requires an exclusive lock, so it’s more resource-intensive.
3. **Autovacuum**:
    
    - **Autovacuum** is an automatic background process that runs VACUUM periodically, ensuring regular maintenance without manual intervention.
    - Configurable with parameters like `autovacuum_vacuum_threshold` and `autovacuum_vacuum_cost_limit`.
4. **Benefits**: Prevents table bloat, improves query performance, and maintains efficient use of storage.

#### Example 
```sql
VACUUM;
-- Or to perform a full vacuum
VACUUM FULL my_table;
```